oneDNN v3.7 release notes (#2481)
oneapi-src/oneDNN: RELEASE_NOTES.md

# Performance Optimizations
## Intel Architecture Processors
  * Improved fp16/bf16 softmax performance with relaxed [accumulation mode](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_attributes_accumulation_mode.html#doxid-dev-guide-attributes-accumulation-mode).
  * Added support and improved perfomance for fp8 matmul with bf16/fp16.

## Intel Graphics Products
  * Introduced initial optimizations for GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
  * Improved performance for convolution for Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API
    * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with causal mask](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa)
    * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with compressed key and value](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv)
```

## AArch64-based Processors

# Functionality
  * Introduced support for `select` algorithm in binary primitive. The functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs.

>   * Enabled support for matmul primitive with grouped quantization on weight along N dimension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Enabled support for matmul primitive with grouped quantization on weight along N dimension
  * Graph API: new [`select`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_select.html), [`GenIndex`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) and [`GreaterEqual`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_greaterequal.html) operations.
```

  * Introduced support for fp16/bf16 compressed weights in fp32 matmul on Intel CPUs.
  * Introduced support for grouped scales and zero points in reorder primitive.

>   * Enabled support for 4d weight scale in matmul primitive.

Reviewer: Not sure since I believe we do not have optimized implementation for these.

```suggestion
  * Enabled support for 4d weight scale in matmul primitive.
  * Graph API: added support for Quantized and non-quantized Gated MLP pattern
```

  * [experimental] Extended microkernel API:
		Introduced int4 quantization support.

> 		Fpmath mode API

Reviewer: I don't think we did that in external microkernel API (and cannot find the related commits).
However we did add a new query for B matrix packing type.

Reviewer 2: Dropped this part.

# Usability

>   * Relaxed memory object lifetime requirements created with CPU engine and SYCL runtime. New behavior is aligned with GPU engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * With SYCL runtime, memory objects on CPU engine are now reference-counted and no more need to be explicitly kept alive by user for the duration of the primitive execution. This align memory object lifetime behavior on CPU and GPU engines.
```

  * Improve verbose diagnostic to better identify issues during dispatching, primitive and kernel creation for CPU primitive and GPU (in case of OpenCL implementation) primitive implementations.
  * Improve verbose diagnostic to simplify debugging of nGEN fallbacks.

>   * Enabled frame pointers support on Intel64 platforms to improve integration with profilers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Enabled frame pointers support on Intel64 platforms to improve integration with profilers.
  * Added [examples](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN/tree/main/examples/graph) for Gated MLP and int4 Gated MLP
```

# Performance Optimizations

> ## Intel Architecture Processors

Reviewer 2: @tprimak, I think we had a bit more improvements for x64. Please review and update this section.

  * Improved fp16/bf16 softmax performance with relaxed [accumulation mode](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_attributes_accumulation_mode.html#doxid-dev-guide-attributes-accumulation-mode).
  * Added support and improved perfomance for fp8 matmul with bf16/fp16.

> ## Intel Graphics Products

Reviewer 2: @karturov, please review and update this section.

Reviewer 2: Completed by @echeresh.

  * Introduced initial optimizations for GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.

>   * Improved performance for convolution for Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Improved performance for Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake).
```

  * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API
    * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with causal mask](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa)
    * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with compressed key and value](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv)

> ## AArch64-based Processors

Reviewer 2: @jondea, @theComputeKid, could you please help summarizing AArch64 improvements?

Reviewer 3: @Sqvid I think you have a list of our improvements?
cc: @Radu2k @Ryo-not-rio

Reviewer 4: @vpirogov We had several changes that were merged into the 3.6.2 patch release, but this will be the first major release they are in. Should they be mentioned again or not?

Reviewer 2: @Sqvid, v3.7 release notes summarize the changes in comparison to v3.6, so let's mention these as well.

  * Introduced support for fp16/bf16 compressed weights in fp32 matmul on Intel CPUs.
  * Introduced support for grouped scales and zero points in reorder primitive.
  * Enabled support for 4d weight scale in matmul primitive.
  * Introduced preliminary support for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` in matmul and reorder, as well as `e8m0` scales data type in matmul and reorder.
  * [experimental] Extended microkernel API:
		Introduced int4 quantization support.
		Fpmath mode API
# Usability
  * With SYCL runtime, memory objects on CPU engine are now reference-counted and no more need to be explicitly kept alive by user for the duration of the primitive execution. This align memory object lifetime behavior on CPU and GPU engines.
  * Improve verbose diagnostic to better identify issues during dispatching, primitive and kernel creation for CPU primitive and GPU (in case of OpenCL implementation) primitive implementations.

>   * Improve verbose diagnostic to simplify debugging of nGEN fallbacks.

Reviewer 2: nGEN is an implementation detail. I would suggest calling out specific situations when new diagnostics is triggered.

+@avmanerikar

```suggestion
  * Improved verbose diagnostics for Intel GPU driver compatibility issues.
```

  * Enabled frame pointers support on Intel64 platforms to improve integration with profilers.
  * Added [examples](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN/tree/main/examples/graph) for Gated MLP and int4 Gated MLP
# Validation

>   * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for fp8 matmul patterns for tensor tags in RNN primitive validation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for fp8 matmul patterns for tensor tags in RNN primitive validation.
  * Extended benchdnn with support for rewriting data types in the test JSON files in graph driver.
  * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for the number of partition returned from the test JSON files.
```

# Deprecated Functionality

# Breaking Changes
  * Updated minimal supported CMake version to 3.13 (was 2.8.12).
  * Updated minimal supported GCC version to 8.0 (was 4.8).
  * Updated minimal supported Clang version to 11.0 (was 3.0).
  * Removed support for SYCL older than 2020
# Thanks to these Contributors

> This release contains contributions from the [project core team] as well as Michał Górny @mgorny, Fadi Arafeh @fadara01, John Osorio @kala855, Ravi Pushkar @rpushkarr, Marek Michalowski @michalowski-arm, Renato Barros Arantes @renato-arantes, Ryo Suzuki @Ryo-not-rio, Varad Ahirwadkar @varad-ahirwadkar, Tadej Ciglarič @t4c1, Nikhil Sharma @nikhilfujitsu, @taoye9, @Shreyas-fuj, @raistefintel. We would also like to thank everyone who asked questions and reported issues.

Reviewer 2: Here's what I get from the magical script for this section:
This release contains contributions from the [project core team](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN/blob/rls-v3.6/MAINTAINERS.md) as well as Aditya Tewari @aditew01, Alexandra Sidorova @a-sidorova, Atharva Dubey @AD2605, Deb Taylor @deb-intel, Dmitriy Ovchinnikov @inteldimitrius, Fadi Arafeh @fadara01, Hengyu Meng @airMeng, @hmaciak, John Osorio @kala855, Marek Michalowski @michalowski-arm, Michael Froelich @MichaelFroelich, Michał Górny @mgorny, Nikhil Sharma @nikhilfujitsu, Permanence AI Coder @Permanence-AI-Coder, @raistefintel, Ravi Pushkar @rpushkarr, Renato Barros Arantes @renato-arantes, Romain Biessy @Rbiessy, Ryo Suzuki @Ryo-not-rio, @Shreyas-fuj, Varad Ahirwadkar @varad-ahirwadkar, @vishwascm, and Ye Tao @taoye9.

# Performance Optimizations

> ## Intel Architecture Processors

Reviewer 6: @vgvozdeva we need to add the following
* Improved performance for int8 RNN primitive on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX512 instruction set support.
* Improved performance of convolution and matmul primitives on processors with Intel AMX support.
* Improved performance of fp8 matmul primitives with bf16 and fp16 bias datatype on processors with Intel AMX instruction set support.
* Improved performance of int8 matmul primitive with fp16 output datatype.
* Improved performance of int8 depthwise separable convolution primitive with pre-channel zero points on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX512 instruction set support.

  * Improved fp16/bf16 softmax performance with relaxed [accumulation mode](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_attributes_accumulation_mode.html#doxid-dev-guide-attributes-accumulation-mode).

>   * Added support and improved perfomance for fp8 matmul with bf16/fp16.

Reviewer 6: I've reworded this and included into the previous comment, so "Added support and improved perfomance for fp8 matmul with bf16/fp16" needs to be removed

Author: Add all changes in last commit

# Performance Optimizations
## Intel Architecture Processors
  * Improved fp16/bf16 softmax performance with relaxed [accumulation mode](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_attributes_accumulation_mode.html#doxid-dev-guide-attributes-accumulation-mode).
  * Improved performance for int8 RNN primitive on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX512 instruction set support.
  * Improved performance of convolution and matmul primitives on processors with Intel AMX support.

>   * Improved performance of fp8 matmul primitives with bf16 and fp16 bias datatype on processors with Intel AMX instruction set support.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Improved performance of fp8 matmul primitives with bf16 and fp16 bias data type on processors with Intel AMX instruction set support.
```

>   * Improved performance of int8 matmul primitive with fp16 output datatype.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Improved performance of int8 matmul primitive with fp16 output data type.
```

  * Improved performance of int8 depthwise separable convolution primitive with pre-channel zero points on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX512 instruction set support.

## Intel Graphics Products
  * Introduced initial optimizations for GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
  * Improved performance for Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake) and Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
  * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API

>     * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with implicit causal mask](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA) [with implicit causal mask](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa)
```

>     * Scaled dot-product Attention (SDPA) [with int8/int4 compressed key and value](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    * Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA) [with int8/int4 compressed key and value](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv)
```

>     * Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA) [with int8/int4 compressed key and value](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv)

Reviewer 8: ```
  * Improved performance of convolution with source zero points by pre-packing compenstation
  * Improved performance of backward by data convolution with strides for large filter
  * Introduced stochastic rounding support for convolution, matmul and reorder based on Philox counter-based RNG
  * Introduced advanced quantization support in matmul primitive: grouped scales and zero-points, weights decompession
  * Improved support of large size tensors in convolution, matmul and reduction primitives
  * Added support for strided memory formats in convolution
  * Added accumulation mode support in matmul primitive
  * Added limited functional support for int4 and fp4 data types
  * Reduced scratchpad usage for NCHW convolution
  * [experimental] Added functional support for sparse matmul with COO encoding
```

Added some highlights for Intel GPU support. This may need one more look though from @karturov and @vpirogov

Reviewer 2: Added these to branch. Thanks, @echeresh!

## AArch64-based Processors

# Functionality
  * Introduced support for `select` algorithm in binary primitive. The functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs.
  * Enabled support for matmul primitive with grouped quantization on weight along N dimension
  * Graph API: new [`Select`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_select.html), [`GenIndex`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_genindex.html) and [`GreaterEqual`](https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_greaterequal.html) operations.
  * Introduced support for fp16/bf16 compressed weights in fp32 matmul on Intel CPUs.
  * Introduced support for grouped scales and zero points in reorder primitive.
  * Enabled support for 4d weight scale in matmul primitive.

>   * Graph API: added support for Quantized and non-quantized Gated MLP pattern

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Graph API: Added support for quantized and non-quantized Gated MLP patterns
```

  * Introduced preliminary support for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` in matmul and reorder, as well as `e8m0` scales data type in matmul and reorder.
  * [experimental] Extended microkernel API:
		Introduced int4 quantization support.
		Fpmath mode API
# Usability
  * With SYCL runtime, memory objects on CPU engine are now reference-counted and no more need to be explicitly kept alive by user for the duration of the primitive execution. This align memory object lifetime behavior on CPU and GPU engines.
  * Improve verbose diagnostic to better identify issues during dispatching, primitive and kernel creation for CPU primitive and GPU (in case of OpenCL implementation) primitive implementations.
  * Improved verbose diagnostics for Intel GPU driver compatibility issues.
  * Enabled frame pointers support on Intel64 platforms to improve integration with profilers.
  * Added [examples](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN/tree/main/examples/graph) for Gated MLP and int4 Gated MLP
# Validation
  * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for fp8 matmul patterns for tensor tags in RNN primitive validation.

>   * Extended benchdnn with support for rewriting data types in the test JSON files in graph driver.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Extended benchdnn with support for rewriting data types in the test JSON files in the graph driver.
```

>   * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for the number of partition returned from the test JSON files.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Extended benchdnn with support and validation for the number of partitions returned from the test JSON files.
```

> # Performance Optimizations

Reviewer 9: Thanks @vpirogov. We had a look but no new features nor performance improvements made it in the 3.7 branch. We'll have a few new features for the next release. @sgeor255 approved the PR as is.

> # Performance Optimizations

Reviewer 2: To be specific, these release notes cover changes from oneDNN v3.6 code freeze (Sept 6, 2024) up until today.

> # Performance Optimizations

Reviewer 2: Anything from [this list for changes](https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3Av3.7+label%3Aplatform%3Agpu-amd%2Cplatform%3Agpu-generic%2Cplatform%3Agpu-nvidia) worth calling out?

> # Performance Optimizations

Reviewer 9: Sorry I missed your answer. We got confused with what made it to the 3.7 branch. I have added a suggestion in the "Functionality" section!

## Intel Architecture Processors

>   * Improved performance of convolution and matmul primitives on Intel Xeon processors with Intel AMX support (formerly Sapphire Rapids and Granite Rapids).

Reviewer 6: @vgvozdeva could you please also add the following 
* Improved performance of `int8` and `fp32` forward convolution primitive on processors with Intel AVX2 instruction set support.

Author: Added in latest commit

  * Improved performance of `int8` RNN primitive on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX-512 instruction set support.
  * Improved performance of `int8` depthwise separable convolution primitive with per-channel zero points on processors with Intel AVX2 and Intel AVX-512 instruction set support.
  * Improved `fp16` and `bf16` softmax performance with relaxed [accumulation mode].
  * Improved performance of `int8` matmul primitive with `fp16` output data type.
  * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:
    * [Gated Multi-Layer Perceptron (Gated MLP)].

[accumulation mode]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_attributes_accumulation_mode.html#doxid-dev-guide-attributes-accumulation-mode

## Intel Graphics Products
  * Introduced initial optimizations for Intel GPUs based on Xe3 architecture.
  * Improved performance for Intel Arc Graphics for Intel Core Ultra processors (Series 2) (formerly Lunar Lake) and Intel Arc B-series discrete graphics (formerly Battlemage).
  * Improved performance of convolution with source zero points by pre-packing compenstation.
  * Improved performance of backward by data convolution with strides for large filter.

>   * Improved performance of the following subgraphs with Graph API:

Reviewer 10: I see. IMO, any new pattern with fully optimized implementation underneath should be in Performance section (int4 KV and implicit causal mask) while ones with only reference implementation should stay in Functionality (Gated MLP).

# Functionality

## Common
  * Introduced support for `select` algorithm in binary primitive. The functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs.
  * Extended quantization support in matmul and reorder with grouped scales and zero-points for weights. This functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs and GPUs.
  * Introduced initial support for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` in matmul and reorder, as well as `e8m0` scales data type in matmul and reorder. This functionality is available on Intel CPUs and GPUs.
  * Introduced [`Select`], [`GenIndex`], and [`GreaterEqual`] operations in Graph API.

[`Select`]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_select.html
[`GenIndex`]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_genindex.html
[`GreaterEqual`]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_op_greaterequal.html

## Intel Architecture Processors
  * Introduced support for `fp32` matmul with `fp16` and `bf16` weights.

## Intel Graphics Products
  * Introduced stochastic rounding support for convolution, matmul and reorder based on Philox counter-based random number generator.
  * Introduced support for strided memory formats in convolution.

> 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion

## Generic SYCL backend
  * Add partial support for InnerProduct primitive in the forward direction.
  * Add support for Reduction primitive.

## Nvidia native backend
  * Add support for matmul using cuBLASLt.

```

Reviewer 2: Thanks! Incorporated.

    * Scaled Dot-Product Attention (SDPA) with [implicit causal mask].
    * SDPA with [`int8` or `int4` compressed key and value].
    * Gated MLP.

[implicit causal mask]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa
[`int8` or `int4` compressed key and value]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_sdpa_compressed_kv.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-sdpa-compressed-kv
[Gated Multi-Layer Perceptron (Gated MLP)]: https://oneapi-src.github.io/oneDNN/dev_guide_graph_gated_mlp.html#doxid-dev-guide-graph-gated-mlp

## NVIDIA GPUs
  * Improved matmul performance using cuBLASLt-based implementation.

# Functionality

## Common
  * Introduced support for `select` algorithm in binary primitive. The functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs.
  * Extended quantization support in matmul and reorder with grouped scales and zero-points for weights. This functionality is optimized for Intel CPUs and GPUs.
  * Introduced initial support for 4-bit floating-point data types `f4_e2m1` and `f4_e3m0` in matmul and reorder, as well as `e8m0` scales data type in matmul and reorder. This functionality is available on Intel CPUs and GPUs.

>   * Introduced [`Select`], [`GenIndex`], and [`GreaterEqual`] operations in Graph API.

Reviewer 11: Select operation in graph API has already been introduced before v3.7, but the implementation in dnnl backend has been changed in some cases as select algorithm in binary primitive and its jit impl was introduced in v3.7.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, @Jiexin-Zhen!

# Usability

>   * With SYCL runtime, memory objects on CPU engine are now reference-counted and no more need to be explicitly kept alive by user for the duration of the primitive execution. This align memory object lifetime behavior on CPU and GPU engines.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * With the SYCL runtime, memory objects on the CPU engine are now reference-counted and no longer need to be explicitly kept alive for the duration of the primitive execution. This aligns memory object lifetime behavior on CPU and GPU engines.
```

>   * Improve verbose diagnostic to better identify issues during dispatching, primitive and kernel creation for CPU primitive and GPU (in case of OpenCL implementation) primitive implementations.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  * Improved verbose diagnostics to better identify issues during dispatching, primitive and kernel creation for CPU primitive and GPU (in case of OpenCL implementation) primitive implementations.
```
